## S3 101

### What is S3 - Simple Storage Service
S3 provides developers and IT teams with secure, durable, highly scalable object storage. Amazon S3 is easy to use, with a simple web services interface to store and retrieve any amount of data from anywhere on the web.

So:
- S3 is a safe place to store your files.
- It is Object-based storage.
- The data is spread across multiple devices and facilities.

### The basics of S3:
- S3 is Object-based - i.e. allows you to upload files.
- Files can be from 0 Bytes to 5 TB.
- There is unlimited storage.
- Files are stored in Buckets.
- S3 is a universal namespace. That is, bucket names must be unique globally.
- When you upload a file to S3, you will receive a HTTP 200 code if the upload was successful.

### S3 Objects
S3 is Object based. Think of Objects just as files. Objects consist of the following:
- Key (This is simply the name of the object)
- Value (This is simply the data and is made up of a sequence of bytes).
- Version ID (Important for versioning)
- Metadata (Data about data you are storing)
- Subresources (Access Control List, torrent)

### Data Consistency Model For S3
How does data consistency work for S3:
- Read after Write consistency for PUTS of new Objects
- Eventual Consistency for overwrite PUTS and DELETES (can take some time to propagate)

In Other Words:
- If you write a new file and read it immediately afterwards, you will be able to view that data.
- If you update AN EXISTING file or delete a file and read it immediately, you may get the older version, or you may not. Basically changes to objects can take a little bit of time to propagate

### S3 - Guarantees
- Built for 99.99% availability for the S3 platform.
- Amazon Guarantee 99.9% availability
- Amazon guarantees 99.999999999% durability for S3 information. (Remember 11 x 9s).

### S3 has the following features;
- Tiered Storage Available
- Lifecycle Management
- Versioning
- Encryption
- MFA Delete
- Secure your data using Access Control Lists and Bucket Policies

### S3 Storage Class
- **S3 Standard**: 99.99% availability, 99.999999999% durability, stored redundantly across multiple devices in multiple facilities, and is designed to sustain the loss of 2 facilities concurrently.
- **S3 - IA (Infrequently Accessed)**: For data that is accessed less frequently, but requires rapid access when needed. Lower fee than S3, but you are charged a retrieval fee.
- **S3 One Zone - IA**: For where you want a lower-cost option for infrequently accessed data, but do not require the multiple Availability Zone data resilience. 
- **S3 - Intelligent Tiering**: Designed to optimize costs by automatically moving data to the most cost-effective access tier, without performance impact or operational overhead
- **S3 Glacier**: S3 Glacier is a secure, durable, and low-cost storage class for data archiving. You can reliably store any amount of data at costs that are competitive with or cheaper than on-premises solutions. Retrieval times configurable from minutes to hours.
- **S3 Glacier Deep Archive**: S3 Glacier Deep Archive is Amazon S3’s lowestcost storage class where a retrieval time of 12 hours is acceptable.

### S3 - Charges
You are charged for S3 in the following ways:
- Storage
- Requests
- Storage Management Pricing
- Data Transfer Pricing
- Transfer Acceleration
- Cross Region Replication Pricing

Note: Amazon S3 Transfer Acceleration enables fast, easy, and secure transfers of files over long distances between your end users and an S3 bucket. Transfer Acceleration takes advantage of Amazon CloudFront’s globally distributed edge locations. As the data arrives at an edge location, data is routed to Amazon S3 over an optimized network path.

### S3 - Encryption
Encryption is broken down in 2 types:
- Client Side Encryption
- Server Side Encryption
  - Server side encryption with Amazon S3 Managed Keys (SSE-S3)
  - Server side encryption with KMS (SSE-KMS)
  - Server side encryption with Customer Provided Keys (SSE-C)

### Exam Tips
- Remember that S3 is Object-based: i.e. allows you to upload files.
- Files can be from 0 Bytes to 5 TB.
- There is unlimited storage.
- Files are stored in Buckets.
- S3 is a universal namespace. That is, names must be unique globally
- Not suitable to install an operating system on.
- Successful uploads will generate a HTTP 200 status code.
- You can turn on MFA Delete
- Key fundamental: See **S3 Object** above
- Remember **Data Consistency Model For S3** above
- Remember **S3 Storage Class** , **S3 Encryption** above
- Control access to buckets using either a bucket ACL or using Bucket Polices
- BY DEFAULT BUCKETS ARE PRIVATE AND ALL OBJECTS STORED INSIDE THEM ARE PRIVATE

**Read the S3 FAQs before taking the exam. It comes up A LOT!**
